Good day I'm Norman Wildberger we're on our way
to establishing something of a new foundation for
parts of linear algebra having to do with matrix
theory and the main two concepts are these ones
that I introduced last time that of a pixel and
a Maxell a pixel is a very familiar object it's
just what we have passed called a point it's a -
list of natural numbers so it's a list with two
elements both of which are natural numbers and the
type for that is picks and then we define a Maxell
to be a multi set of pixels like this one here
M consisting of the pixel 3 5 3 5 & 2 - that's a
multi set so it's a Maxell so we could introduce
a new type max short for Maxell so we have picks
and max two new types of objects that we can
work with now because we like to visualize
things geometrically and visually we're going
to here think about pixels as being visualized
on a screen and the screen for us will be this
framework here where we've arranged that the
pixels are labeled like this 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 and
2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 and so on and you can think about
it alternately as a sheet which sort of extends
to the right and down divided into rectangular
blocks each block corresponding to one of these
pixels so this block here would be the block 2 3
there so the pixel 2/3 can be visualized if you
like as that little block in this screen so this
is an informal object it's really not officially
necessary it allows us to visualize things and it
will allow us to connect more smoothly with this
more familiar theory of matrices later on but
officially what we're really just talking about
our lists and multi sets of lists so it's really
just a purely combinatorial situation at at heart
so just a little bit of additional terminology
will say that the screen has arose so these are
the rows of the screen and it has columns going
this way all right at this level here rows this
way columns this way so in this video we'd like to
lay out a little bit more of the basic definitions
and notations associated with these objects so
let's start with pixels so we defined last time
that a pixel is diagonal if it has the form and N
and the transpose of the pixel a equals MN is the
pixel a T standing for a transpose which is n M so
we just reverse the order of the two entries and
we note that a is diagonal that is of this form
precisely when it's equal to its transpose and we
might also observe that if we take the transpose
of the transpose then we get back to the original
pixel good and let's also say a little bit about
the relationship between two pixels so we'll say
that a which is say KL and B which is say MN are
row collinear precisely when K equals M when the
first two components are equal diagrammatically
that means they're in the same row of our screen
and correspondingly they are column collinear
precisely where in the second entry is match up
when l equals n that's telling us that they're in
the same columns and more generally we will say
they're collinear precisely when they are either
a row collinear or column colinear so they're
either in the same row or in the same column
and sometimes it's useful for us to pick out
what the role is or what the column is so let's
introduce this terminology our standing front
row so bar of a where a as a pixel is the first
entry M it's telling us which row it's in and C
of a is the second entry in this case n which is
the column that it's in so we'll refer to this as
the row of a and this as the column of a and these
are the numbers either just the entries of the
two lists all right now let's turn to Maxwell's
so I'm axel is I remind you a multi set of pixels
and this is its primary manifestation so although
we may end up visualizing a Maxell in number of
different ways particular as a diagram in some
two-dimensional screen it's really primarily a
multi set of lists of two lists and that's its
primary aspect of what it really is so here is
a maximum M consisting of 1 1 1 1 1 3 1 4 2 2 2
2 and 2 4 these are all pixels this is a multi
set containing those pixels so a natural first
thing to define is the size of a Maxell that's
gonna be obviously the size of it as a multi
set the number of pixels that it contains and of
course repetitions are included because this is a
multi set and we'll use the same notation that
we usually do for size so for example in this
case here the size is 7 because there are 1 2 3 4
5 6 7 entries or elements another kind of measure
of how big max'll is is with this other idea the
idea of the extent of a Maxell so the extent of a
maximum is a pixel um which is r comma c where r
and c are the largest rows and columns of pixels
in em respectively so let me explain that so
what we're going to do to find R of this Maxell
he is to look at the various hours of the various
pixels hit him and we see that the biggest one is
to all right so the R value for this max'll will
be 2 and what about the C value well we look at
the second entries and we pick out the largest
one of those which is 4 so then the C it's going
to be 4 and the extent of M then simultaneously
tells us sort of how far over we have to go in in
rows and how far over we have to go in columns
to embrace all of the pixels which are in this
multi set that's another way of sort of specifying
especially on the screen it corresponds to sort of
the smallest rectangle that we can create that
frames entirely our multi set arm axel will say
that a maximum is diagonal precisely when all of
its pixels are diagonal so it consists of pixels
like 1 1 or 4 4 or 1717 and so on the transpose
of a maximum is the maximal denoted m to the T of
transposes of its pixels so a maximum like this
one here is a multi set of pixels if we take the
transpose of each of these pixels then we get the
transpose of the Maxell so here we have 1 1 2 3 2
3 5 1 and the transpose will consist of 1 1 3 2 3
2 and 1 5 once we have the notion of the transpose
of a Maxell then we can introduce this important
idea of the symmetry of a Maxell well say that a
maxilla is symmetric precisely when it equals
its transpose that when you take the transpose
you get back the original maximum geometrically it
means it's sort of symmetric along the diagonal if
3/5 is a pixel inside it then 5/3 will also be I
think pixel inside it and now let's have a look
at the extent of a Maxell and the relation with
the extent of the transpose so the extent of the
maxvill is sort of the size of the smallest
box that it sits in so if that happens to be
RC meaning that there are R rows and see columns
then the extent of the transpose is that transpose
of the extent in other words the extent of M
transpose will be the transpose of this extent
now this is just a pixel so its transpose is
just C R so if am axle has extent 5/3 then its
transpose will have extent 3/5 make sense we've
noted already that the smallest pixely is 1 1
because we're not allowing 0 for the entries of
pixels the empty Maxell is the smallest Maxell so
i'm axel is a multiset multi-set is a collection
of things the simplest possible situation there is
when that collection is empty so the empty Maxell
looks like that it contains no pixels so it's size
is zero we will give it a special name because it
is rather important object so we'll denote it with
this symbol capital all so there's capital o and
it's the empty max'll we'll call it usually the
empty Maxell or maybe sometimes the zero Maxell
and here is the size of o is zero what should be
the extent of all okay so that was a question
of sort of finding the smallest rectangle that
contains this thing well I think if you think
about this definition it's a little bit ambiguous
so we're going to leave this as undefined so
this particular Maxell does not have an extent
other Maxwell's do but for now this thing hasn't
undefined extent let's talk about the realm of
Maxwell's now start thinking about operations
that we can perform with Maxwell's so we've
talked about the realm of natural numbers and
we've talked about the realm of multi sets just
a dozen videos or so ago and what made the realm
of multi sets work is that when you have a multi
set of objects then each of the multiplicities
is a natural number or a natural number plus
zero now in this situation we're talking also
about multi sets they're no longer multi sets
of natural numbers but they're multi sets of
pixels but nevertheless the multiplicities of
any pixel can still be a natural number or zero so
exactly the same kind of reasoning that we used in
discussing multi sets of natural numbers applies
now to this situation of multi sets of pixels in
other words Maxwell's so the Maxwell's themselves
are going to form a realm just like the multi sets
of natural numbers did so in particular would
have operations rather familiar operations of
addition Union and intersection so for example
if we consider these three Maxwell's there's m 1
1 1 2 1 2 2 4 here's n which is 1 2 1 3 3 4 and
O which is 1 1 1 1 2 4 3 4 then M + n these are
multi sets so plus just means addition of multi
sets we just dump everything into one big box so
if we add m and n we just get 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 4
1 2 1 3 3 4 everything just gets put together
if we say take a union that means we're looking at
multiplicities of objects and taking the Union of
the multiplicities in other words the maximum and
so the Union M Union oh well how many one ones we
have here there's one and here there's two so the
maximum that is 2 so this Union will have 1 1 1 1
and 1 2 is one of them there and I think there's
two of them in the M max also there'll be two in
the Union and then we have a 2 4 here and a 2
4 here so the maximum of that is 1 so it'll be
a single 2 4 in the Union and then in addition
we have a single 3 4 there so there's the union
of a Minoo in terms of intersection well it's
just the minimum of multiplicities that we're
looking at so for example if we take N and O then
the intersections well 1 ones there aren't any
1 ones and here so there won't be any in the
intersection there aren't any one 2's here 1
threes no two fours no the only things that they
have in common are the three fours so the minimum
of the multiplicities of the three fours is one
so the intersection is the Maxell consisting of
the single pixel three four and something else
that we can do in terms of operations with our
multi-sets multiplying them by a scalar so if
we take n and say multiply it by 2 to get 2n
just means we're repeating each of the pixels that
are in there twice so there's a 1/2 here so it'll
be 2 1 2 s there's a 1 3 here there'll be 2 1 3 s
there's a 3 4 and there'll be two three fours and
this is generally the convention that we'll use
for these multi sets that if we need to sort of
wrap around we'll just wrap around like this and
you're supposed to remember that there's a left
bracket there and a right bracket there to enclose
the max all together okay so this is pleasant so
now we can sort of go and back and look at all
those various properties that we had for realms
and we can convince ourselves that the same kinds
of things are going to be happening here for this
realm of maxwell's for applications to linear
algebra the then we can add Maxwell's is really
important okay and the fact that we can take
scale or multiples of them is really important
and when we combine those two things it means we
can take linear combinations of Maxwell's as well
so for example if a and B are Maxwell's then a
plus B is a max also is 2a so is 3 B and so is
a linear combination like 2a plus 3b and we're
getting these operations for free this is a very
pleasant situation that we don't have to define
especially how to add and scalar multiply and
then take linear combinations these are automatic
because we're working in this realm of multi sets
whenever we have multi sets of a certain type
we can add them we can scale or multiply them
we can take many combinations it comes for free
so if you take it a linear algebra course what
we have here is the vector space or linear space
structure of these Maxwell's essentially coming
to us without any work and that's quite a pleasant
aspect of those but in addition we have unions and
intersections things which don't get that much
press in linear algebra usually but we're also
in a position of taking the union of two Maxwell's
and taking the intersection of toom axles and I've
already mentioned that the various realm laws that
we discussed in these two videos math foundations
155 and 156 hold also here so you might want to
refresh your memory on that and just check in your
minds that things aren't going to be holding here
all right so that's all very nice but what really
makes things interesting is that we also have a
multiplication now what's particularly pleasant
about this multiplication is that it really starts
at the pixel level and the multiplication at the
Maxell level is almost an automatic consequence
of this fundamental multiplication of pixels and
I should probably warn you that this definition
is a little bit unusual it will be breaking new
territory for you conceptually probably because
of the unusual use of this blank space here so
let's have a look at it so we have two pixels KL
and MN and I'm going to tell you how to multiply
them so no multiplication here is just when
they're together that means multiplication
and the rule is that if l equals M if these two
numbers agree then the product is the pixel K n
fair enough that's very easy but otherwise the
product is empty you get nothing and you really
get nothing you don't get 0 or the empty set
or the empty this or that you just get a blank
there's nothing there so usually in mathematics
when we have a product structure in some context
or another we're multiplying two things of
a certain type we usually get a third thing
which is of the same type that's a typical binary
operation point of view towards multiplication so
that's sort of what we have here I mean we have
to pick those we're multiplying them together
and we get a pixel but only under this condition
otherwise we're not getting a pixel at all because
this empty blank is not a pixel there is no empty
pixel so we're going outside the realm of binary
operation here this is something a little bit
different so for example 1 3 x 3 7 in this case
these intermediate values are they're equal so
the result is 1 7 here 1 3 times 2 7 in this case
these intermediate things are not the same and so
the answer is nothing this empty space and in this
case here we have 2 4 times 4 4 so here the inside
two elements are and so we get the outside - which
is - for all right so it takes some getting used
to but it's I think pretty clear-cut what you get
okay so here's a proposition that if a and B are
pixels then if we take a b and take the transpose
now we get b transpose times a transpose so it's
a proof so suppose that a is KL like this and B
is MN like this okay and let's suppose first of
all that l equals m well in that case when we
multiply a B and take the transpose the product
a B is just as it is here kN so we're taking the
transpose of KN and we know how to do that we just
need to change the entries here and then we get n
K and n K is the same as an M times L K because
we're still under the assumption that l equals m
and this thing here is a B transpose because B was
this and this thing here is a transpose because a
was this now suppose that L does not equal M al
does not equal M well in that case a times B is
empty in that case B transpose times a transpose
well B transpose will look like this thing and a
transpose will look like this thing and if L is
not equal to M then we're in the same situation
that that product is going to be empty so the
left-hand side is empty and the right-hand side
is empty so okay it's still equal so okay this is
can be a pleasant and important thing but notice
that it's at the level of pixels of course this
is familiar to you in the matrix form but what
we're doing here is we're just identifying this is
actually at the level of pixels this is happening
all right so now here is a more serious theorem
this theorem gets a name associativity of pixel
multiplication and it is that if a B and C are
all pixels then a B times C equals a times B C
so we have associativity of pixel multiplication
okay I'm gonna have to say a little bit about this
there's a kind of a special case here that our
previous definition hasn't really covered and I
will discuss that during the proof we'll start
by introducing a to BK l bead BM n say and C
equals o P okay so we're gonna have to look at a
B times C at a times B C and let's look first at
the case when l equals m and N equals o so the
inside ones here agree and the inside ones of
these two also agree okay so if the inside ones
here gray then the product of a B is KN and then
if N and all agree then a B times C will be K n
times o P which will be K P so this first thing
will evaluate to KP on the other hand this thing
here if we multiply B times C first the end and
the over agreeing are the same that means we're
going to get M P and then when we multiply by a
we get KL times M P over agreeing that l equals
M so that'll give us KP again so under these two
assumptions both this and this evaluate to K P
the first one of a and the second one of C and
the claim is that everything is empty otherwise
but we have to say to be precise what it means for
an empty pixel to multiply by a regular pixel we
actually haven't defined the product of an empty
thing with the pixel C so we have to define that
in that case that product is going to be empty as
well yeah that's the meaning that we'll assign
if this happens to be an empty situation and
we're multiplying by C then the result still
empty alright so now we have to look at the
cases when this is not happening so if this is not
happening then a B is going to be empty and this
won't be empty what about this thing here well
this might be empty in which case the whole thing
will be empty or it might not be empty if it's not
empty it's got to be of the form M times P that's
the case what N equals all but then if this is MP
then the fact that that M does not equal L that's
our assumption will mean that this is going to be
empty so this is not true then both of these are
empty and similarly if this is not true then both
of these are going to be empty so in either case
if we do not have both these conditions these two
things are both empty so our social activity is a
theorem you might like to ponder what happens
if we have more than three pixels suppose we
have a with just KL b which is MN c which is o
P and another one D which is Q R you might like
to show that then ABCD is well defined again
that associativity implies that we don't need
to worry about where the brackets go it equals
K R that's the first one here and the last one
there precisely when l equals m these agree and
when M equals o and when P equals Q so if all of
the interior ones sort of agree then the product
is not empty and we get K R and otherwise we just
get an empty product so it takes some thinking
to so work through this argument please give this
some thought and convince yourself that this is
sort of reasonable and that we really have this
associativity at the level of pixels okay very
important it's the this associativity of pixel
multiplication which really drives the entire
structure in some sense having now a duplication
for pixel's we are going to jack this up to a
multiplication form axles and that's really where
this algebra is happening at the level of Naxals
and to go from this pixel multiplication to the
Maxell multiplication is really the invocation
of a general principle or it's a definition
really that we're gonna ply in other situations
also later on so if in general and very general
situation if we can multiply objects a and B of
some type to get say a times B then in general we
can multiply multi sets of these objects okay and
we do that by considering all possible products
with the correct multiplicities forming another
multi set so this is a very general statement
that we're going to apply in a lot of different
situations we're going to agree that if we have
some kinds of objects and we have a multiplication
defined for them and now we're considering multi
sets of those objects so for example here's some
multi set of some objects a B and C and we don't
really care what exactly those objects are and
here's another multi set D same kind of objects
as these ones but we don't actually care precisely
what they are then in order to multiply this multi
set with this multi set we're going to agree that
what we're gonna do is we're going to multiply
each one of these ones with each one of these ones
and put all of that all possible products in the
big box right that's gonna be our orientation
to how we take product of multi sets in a very
general fashion this is a very important ideas
can have major consequences for us in algebra
like for example in group theory we're gonna see
it's really going to be a very instructive idea
okay so to be precise here we've got ABC in
this multi set we've got D here then when we
take the product we're gonna get the multi set
consisting of a times D whatever that is a times
e B times D B times e C times D and C times E just
compute all those products and then put them all
together in a big box right so having said that
we don't really have to do anything separate for
the Maxell situation we have a multiplication of
pixels Mac cells are just multi sets of pixels so
immediately the multiplication of pixels defines
a multiplication of maxim's and let's give one
final example of this kind of multiplication
so here's a Maxell and here's another maxilla
we're going to multiply these two maxwell's
so this Maxell contains the pixel of 1 1 1
2 1 2 2 3 and over here this Maxell contains the
pixels 2 1 2 4 3 5 so in order to multiply these
maxwell's what we're going to do is we're going
to multiply each one of these with each one of
those okay so let's do that so 1 1 times 2 1 what
is that well to calculate the product we have to
check whether this entry here is the same as
that enter there that one and that 2 are not
the same so that means that the product is empty
in the big collective box we're putting nothing
this product contributes nothing to the final
multiset okay so next one 1 1 times 2 4 again
the one in the to do not agree we're getting
nothing this 1 times 3 4 again we get nothing
how about 1/2 times 2 1 well now this 2 and this
2 do agree and we're gonna get therefore the outer
ones which is 1 1 so there we get a 1 1 there
so that's the result of this pixel times this
pixel okay what about this one times 2 4 we're
going to get 1 4 as a result there and 1/2 times
3 5 that gives us just empty this how about 1 2
well that's the same story 1 2 times 2 1 that's
going to give us another 1 1 1 2 times 2/4 and to
give us another 1/4 and 1/2 times 3/5 is going to
give us another nothing which doesn't contribute
and finally 2 3 this is nothing two three times
this is nothing into 3 times 3 5 is 2 5 so he
just have repeated pixel multiplication if you
go through all these possibilities and all these
possibilities and take all possible products and
put them all in a big box remembering that when
we get nothing well we're putting in nothing so
there's no contribution all right this is really
fabulous it's an elementary way of capturing
matrix multiplication a way that gives us a lot
of things for free for example a social activity
will observe next time is pretty well automatic in
this kind of situation but this also gives us more
flexiblity we're not constrained anymore to have
a matrix of one size only multiplying a matrix
of some other particular size any Maxell times
any other Maxwell we can multiply them we can do
multiplication uniformly across the board to these
Maxwell's it's not a selective multiplication
as you learn in traditional linear algebra so
re-orientation will be partially necessary want
you to forget a little bit just a little bit about
what you know about regular matrix multiplication
at least just temporarily eventually then we'll
come back and connect with that all right great
so we've introduced a lot of interesting
important things next video we're going
to go further in this direction so more about
Maxwell multiplication as various ramifications
and examples I hope you'll join me for that
i'm Norman Wildberegr thanks for listening